## 1. Background
### 1. Default Styles
> **Resource**
> - [Reboot, Resets, and Reasoning](https://css-tricks.com/reboot-resets-reasoning/)

Browsers apply a set of **default styles** to every webpage. These styles are part of the *user-agent stylesheets*, ensuring **basic styling for webpages without CSS**. Each browser has its own set of user-agent stylesheets so the default styles can vary slightly between browsers.
* The rules you write in your stylesheet have higher precedence than the user-agent rules and therefore overwrite the defaults. 
* Some developers use CSS resets, which are stylesheets containing CSS rules aimed at altering/removing the defaults set by user-agent stylesheets → create a clean slate to apply styles without interference. 
CSS resets are still commonly used, but they are not mandatory. 
### 2.  CSS Units
> **Resources**
> - [CSS units: em, rem, and px](https://codyloyd.com/2021/css-units/)
> - [Viewport units](https://css-tricks.com/fun-viewport-units/)
#### 1. Absolute units
**Absolute units** are those that are always the same in any context. For web projects, **`px`** is the most commonly used absolute unit.
#### 2. Relative units
**Relative units** are units that can change based on their context. 

> Even though **`em`** and **`rem`** are based on the font size, they can be used to define other sizes in CSS.  

1. **`em`**: is a unit based on the font size of the element (or the element’s parent.) 
* When you set a `font-size` on a parent `<div>`, the `em` units for all child elements inside this `<div>` will be relative to that `font-size`.

→ Relying on `em` means that a particular size could change if the context changes, which is NOT the behavior we want. 

<u>**Example**</u>: A parent `<div>` with a `font-size` set to `16px`. If you set the `width` of a child element within that `<div>` to `2em`, the child element's font size will also be `32px` (= `16px` x 2.)

2. **`rem`**: is also a unit based on the font size, but of the root element `<html>`. The math works the same with `rem` as it did with `em` but without the added complexity of keeping track of the parent’s font size. 

→ Using a relative size like `rem` to define font sizes across your website ***is recommended***.
#### 3. [Viewport units](https://css-tricks.com/fun-viewport-units/)
The **viewport** of a page is the part of the web page that is visible within the web browser window. The viewport size can change depending on the device (desktop, tablet, mobile) and the browser window size.

The units **`vh`** and **`vw`** relate to the size of the viewport.
* `1vh` is equal to 1% of the viewport height. 
* `1vw` is equal to 1% of the viewport width. 
→ These can be useful any time you want something to be sized relative to the viewport, examples including full-height heroes, and full-screen app-like interfaces.
### 3. Fonts and Text Styles
#### 1. Fonts
When you specify a font in CSS using the `font-family` property, it's a good practice to provide a list of fallback fonts. This list is known as a [**font stack**](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/system-font-stack/). If the first font in the list is not available on the user's system, the browser will try the next font, and so on, until it finds an available font. If a default font isn’t defined, the default HTML font will be used.
```css
/* example of the system's font stack */
body {
  font-family: system-ui, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol";
}
```
#### 2. Web Fonts
If you want to use a font that won’t be available on the user’s device, you will need to import the font from an online source. 

1. **Online font libraries**
To use a font from one of these libraries, go to the website, select a font, and then copy a snippet from the website to import that font from their server into your website. 

You’ll be given either a `<link>` tag to put in your HTML or an `@import` tag that goes on top of a CSS file. 
```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.googleapis.com">
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.gstatic.com" crossorigin>
<link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Roboto&display=swap" rel="stylesheet">
```

```css
@import url('https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Roboto&display=swap');
```

> <u>**Note**</u>: When using a font library, you must comply with the library’s privacy policies and regulations. For example, using Google Fonts API [violates the European GDPR](https://thehackernews.com/2022/01/german-court-rules-websites-embedding.html). If you are concerned about complying with such regulations, you can download the font from the library and host it yourself.

2. **Self hosted fonts**