The **grid** is a powerful layout system that allows you to create complex and responsive grid-based designs. It provides a way to **divide the web page into rows and column**s, making it easier to position and align elements.
## I. Introduction to Grid
> **Resource**
> - [Complete Guide to Grid](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/complete-guide-grid/)
### 1. Setting up a Grid
#### 1. Grid container
We can think about CSS Grid in terms of a **container** and **items**. When you make an element a grid container, it will “contain” the whole grid. In CSS, an element is turned into a grid container with the property **`display: grid`** or **`display: inline-grid`**.

> **Note:** Only the **direct child elements** will become grid items here. If we had another element as a child under one of _these_ child elements it would not be a grid item.

```html
<!-- index.html -->
<div class="container">
  <div>Item 1</div>
  <div>Item 2
    <p>I am not a grid item!</p>
  </div>
  <div>Item 3</div>
  <div>Item 4</div>
</div>
```

```css
.container {
  display: grid;
}
```
#### 2. Columns and Rows
**Columns** are the vertical tracks in a grid layout. They are defined using the **`grid-template-columns`** property.
```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: 200px 100px 300px; 
  /* Three column tracks with widths 200px, 100px, and 300px */
}
```

Rows are the horizontal tracks in a grid layout. They are defined using the **`grid-template-rows`** property.
```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-rows: 50px 100px auto; 
  /* Three row tracks with heights 50px, 100px, and auto */
}
```

The **`grid-template`** property is a shorthand for defining **both columns and rows** together. The columns are specified after the forward-slash (`/`), and the rows are defined before the slash.
```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template: 50px 100px / 200px 50px 100px; 
  /* Two row tracks (50px, 100px) and three column tracks (200px, 50px, 100px) */
}
```
### 2. Explicit vs. Implicit Grid
> **Resource**
> - [Implicit vs. Explicit Tracks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8_153Zz4YI8&ab_channel=WesBos)

**Explicit grid tracks** are the ones you define directly using the `grid-template-columns` and `grid-template-rows` properties. These properties allow you to specify the size and number of columns and rows in your grid layout.

**Implicit grid tracks** are automatically created by the grid layout when there are more grid items than the explicit grid tracks can accommodate. These implicit tracks are added as needed to fit the extra grid items. By default, the size of implicit grid tracks is determined by the `grid-auto-rows` and `grid-auto-columns` properties.
```css
.container {
    display: grid;
    grid-template-rows: 30px 100px; /* Two explicit row tracks */
    grid-auto-rows: 80px; /* Size of implicit row tracks */
}
```
### 3. Gap
The **gap** between grid rows and columns is known as the gutter or alley. Gap sizes can be adjusted separately for rows and columns using the `column-gap` and `row-gap` properties. 
```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr);
  grid-template-rows: repeat(3, 100px);
  row-gap: 20px; /* Gap between rows */
  column-gap: 30px; /* Gap between columns */
}
```

Furthermore, we can use a shorthand property called `gap` to set both `row-gap` and `column-gap`.
```css
.container {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr);
  grid-template-rows: repeat(3, 100px);
  gap: 20px 30px; /* row-gap: 20px, column-gap: 30px */
}
```