## 1. Variables and Operators
> **Resources**
> - [JavaScript Variables](https://javascript.info/variables)
> - [Basic in Math in JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Math#arithmetic_operators)
## 1. Variables
**Variables** are “***named storage containers***” for data in your code. To create a variable in JavaScript, we use **`let`** keyword. We can assign values/data to a variable by using the assignment operator **`=`.**
```js
let message;
message = "Hello World" // store a string value into the "mesage" variable

alert(message); // a pop-up show up on the page, saying "Hello World"
```

* We can declare multiple variables in one line or separately: 
```js
let user = "James", age = 25, message = "Hello everyone, I'm James John!";

// this may have better code readability
let user = "James"; 
let age = 25;
let message = "Hello everyone, I'm James John!"
```

* We can **change the value of a variable** by **reassigning** a new value to it. When the value is changed, the old data is removed from the variable: 
```js
let message; 
message = "Hello!";
message = "World!"; // value has changed from Hello -> World
console.log("message"); // Output: World!
```

* We can **assign a variable to be a value of a variable:** 
```js
let greeting = "Hello!";
let message = greeting; 
console.log(message); // Output: Hello!
```
## 2. Variable Naming
There are **two limitations** on variable names in JavaScript:
1. The name must contain only letters, digits, or the symbols `$` and `_`.
2. The first character must not be a digit.
```js
let id; // valid
let firstName; // valid
let $ = 1; // valid
let _ = 2; // valid

let 1a; // invalid
let my-name; //invalid
```

* When the name contains multiple words, [camelCase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase) is commonly used. That is: words go one after another, each word except first starting with a capital letter: `myVeryLongName`.
* **Casing** in variables’ names **matters**, so a variable named `apple` is a different variable from `Apple` or `APPLE`. 
* There is a [list of reserved words](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Lexical_grammar#Keywords), which **cannot** be used as variable names because they are used by the language itself. For example: `let`, `class`, `return`, and `function` are reserved.
## 3. Constants
To declare a **constant** (**unchanging**) **variable**, use **`const`** instead of `let`. Variables declared using `const` are called “constants”. They ***cannot be reassigned***. An attempt to do so would cause an error:
```js
const myBirthday = '18.04.1982';
myBirthday = '01.01.2001'; // error, can't reassign the constant!
```
> When a programmer is sure that a variable will never change, they can declare it with `const` to guarantee and communicate that fact to everyone.

* There is a widespread practice to **use constants as aliases for difficult-to-remember values** that are known before execution. Such constants are named using **capital letters** and **underscores**.
```js
const COLOR_RED = "#F00";
const COLOR_GREEN = "#0F0";
const COLOR_BLUE = "#00F";
const COLOR_ORANGE = "#FF7F00";

// ...when we need to pick a color

let color = COLOR_ORANGE;

console.log(color); // #FF7F00
```

> Some constants are known before execution (like a hexadecimal value for red) and some constants are **_calculated_** in run-time, during the execution, but do not change after their initial assignment:
> → Capital-named constants are only used as aliases for “**hard-coded**” values.
## 4. Assignment Operators
**Assignment operators** are operators that **assign** a value to a variable. We have already used the most basic one, `=` to assign values to a variables in examples above. We have other assignment operators such as: 
* `+=`: **addition assignment**. Example: `x += 4` equals to `x = x + 4`.
* `-=`: **subtraction assignment**. Example: `x -= 3` equals to `x = x -3`.
* `*=`: **multiplication assignment**. Example: `x *= 3` equals to `x = x * 3`.
* `/=`: **division assignment**. Example: `x /= 5` equals to `x = x /5`.
## 5. Comparison Operators
Sometimes we will want to run true/false tests, then act accordingly depending on the result of that test — to do this we use **comparison operators**.
* `===`: strict equality. This tests whether the left and right values are **identical** to each other. <u>Example</u>: `5 === "5"` → returns `false`, because they’re not the same data type.
* `!==`: strict-non-equality. This tests whether the left and right values are **not identical** to each other. <u>Example</u>: `5 !== "5"` → `true`
* `==`: equality. This does similar to strict equality, but does not check whether the values’ datatypes are the same. <u>Example</u>: `5 == "5"` → returns `true`. 
* `!=`: non-quality. This does similar to strict non-equality but again, doesn’t consider the values’ datatypes. <u>Example:</u> `5 != "5"` → `false`.
* `<`: less than. 
* `>`: greater than.
* `<=`: less than or equal to.
* `>=`: greater than or equal to. 
> **Common Terminology:** 
> * _An operand_ – is what operators are applied to. For instance, in the multiplication of `5 * 2` there are two operands: the left operand is `5` and the right operand is `2`. Sometimes, people call these “arguments” instead of “operands”.
> * An operator is _unary_ if it has a single operand. For example, the unary negation `-` reverses the sign of a number: `x = -x`.
> * An operator is _binary_ if it has two operands:<center></center> `x + y`.

