**Basic Introduction to JavaScript.** 
## 1. Variables and Operators
> **Resources**
> - [JavaScript Variables](https://javascript.info/variables)
> - [Basic in Math in JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Math#arithmetic_operators)
### 1. Variables
**Variables** are “***named storage containers***” for data in your code. To create a variable in JavaScript, we use **`let`** keyword. We can assign values/data to a variable by using the assignment operator **`=`.**
```js
let message;
message = "Hello World" // store a string value into the "mesage" variable

alert(message); // a pop-up show up on the page, saying "Hello World"
```

* We can declare multiple variables in one line or separately: 
```js
let user = "James", age = 25, message = "Hello everyone, I'm James John!";

// this may have better code readability
let user = "James"; 
let age = 25;
let message = "Hello everyone, I'm James John!"
```

* We can **change the value of a variable** by **reassigning** a new value to it. When the value is changed, the old data is removed from the variable: 
```js
let message; 
message = "Hello!";
message = "World!"; // value has changed from Hello -> World
console.log("message"); // Output: World!
```

* We can **assign a variable to be a value of a variable:** 
```js
let greeting = "Hello!";
let message = greeting; 
console.log(message); // Output: Hello!
```
### 2. Variable Naming
There are **two limitations** on variable names in JavaScript:
1. The name must contain only letters, digits, or the symbols `$` and `_`.
2. The first character must not be a digit.
```js
let id; // valid
let firstName; // valid
let $ = 1; // valid
let _ = 2; // valid

let 1a; // invalid
let my-name; //invalid
```

* When the name contains multiple words, [camelCase](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CamelCase) is commonly used. That is: words go one after another, each word except first starting with a capital letter: `myVeryLongName`.
* **Casing** in variables’ names **matters**, so a variable named `apple` is a different variable from `Apple` or `APPLE`. 
* There is a [list of reserved words](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Lexical_grammar#Keywords), which **cannot** be used as variable names because they are used by the language itself. For example: `let`, `class`, `return`, and `function` are reserved.
### 3. Constants
To declare a **constant** (**unchanging**) **variable**, use **`const`** instead of `let`. Variables declared using `const` are called “constants”. They ***cannot be reassigned***. An attempt to do so would cause an error:
```js
const myBirthday = '18.04.1982';
myBirthday = '01.01.2001'; // error, can't reassign the constant!
```
> When a programmer is sure that a variable will never change, they can declare it with `const` to guarantee and communicate that fact to everyone.

* There is a widespread practice to **use constants as aliases for difficult-to-remember values** that are known before execution. Such constants are named using **capital letters** and **underscores**.
```js
const COLOR_RED = "#F00";
const COLOR_GREEN = "#0F0";
const COLOR_BLUE = "#00F";
const COLOR_ORANGE = "#FF7F00";

// ...when we need to pick a color

let color = COLOR_ORANGE;

console.log(color); // #FF7F00
```

> Some constants are known before execution (like a hexadecimal value for red) and some constants are **_calculated_** in run-time, during the execution, but do not change after their initial assignment:
> → Capital-named constants are only used as aliases for “**hard-coded**” values.
### 4. Assignment Operators
**Assignment operators** are operators that **assign** a value to a variable. We have already used the most basic one, `=` to assign values to a variables in examples above. We have other assignment operators such as: 
* `+=`: **addition assignment**. Example: `x += 4` equals to `x = x + 4`.
* `-=`: **subtraction assignment**. Example: `x -= 3` equals to `x = x -3`.
* `*=`: **multiplication assignment**. Example: `x *= 3` equals to `x = x * 3`.
* `/=`: **division assignment**. Example: `x /= 5` equals to `x = x /5`.
### 5. Comparison Operators

^8c5dbb

Sometimes we will want to run true/false tests, then act accordingly depending on the result of that test — to do this we use **comparison operators**.
* `===`: strict equality. This tests whether the left and right values are **identical** to each other. <u>Example</u>: `5 === "5"` → returns `false`, because they’re not the same data type.
* `!==`: strict-non-equality. This tests whether the left and right values are **not identical** to each other. <u>Example</u>: `5 !== "5"` → `true`
* `==`: equality. This does similar to strict equality, but does not check whether the values’ datatypes are the same. <u>Example</u>: `5 == "5"` → returns `true`. 
* `!=`: non-quality. This does similar to strict non-equality but again, doesn’t consider the values’ datatypes. <u>Example:</u> `5 != "5"` → `false`.
* `<`: less than. 
* `>`: greater than.
* `<=`: less than or equal to.
* `>=`: greater than or equal to. 
> **Common Terminology:** 
> * _An operand_ – is what operators are applied to. For instance, in the multiplication of `5 * 2` there are two operands: the left operand is `5` and the right operand is `2`. Sometimes, people call these “arguments” instead of “operands”.
> * An operator is _unary_ if it has a single operand. For example, the unary negation `-` reverses the sign of a number: `x = -x`.
> * An operator is _binary_ if it has two operands:<center></center> `x + y`.
## 2. Numbers
### 1. Arithmetic Operations
> **Resources**
> - [JavaScript Arithmetic](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_arithmetic.asp)
> - [Basic Operators](https://javascript.info/operators)

* The following are **arithmetic operators**: 
	* `+`: addition 
	* `-`: subtraction
	* `*`: multiplication
	* `**`: exponential
	*  `/`: division
	* `%`: modulus (remainder)
	* `++`: increment.
	* `--`: decrement
* **Operator precedence** describes the order in which operations are performed in an arithmetic expression.
	* Multiplication, division is done before addition, subtraction.
	* Parentheses takes the highest precedence.

**Arithmetic operations** can be performed on *numbers*, *variables*, or *expressions*. 
```js
// numbers
let x = 100 + 50; 
console.log(x) // Output;

// variables
let x = a + b; 

// expressions
let x = (100 + 50) * a;
```
### 2. JavaScript Numbers
**Number** is a data type in JavaScript. JavaScript has only **one type of number**. Numbers can be written with or without decimals.
```js
let x = 3.14;    // A number with decimals  
let y = 3;       // A number without decimals

console.log(typeof(x)) // Output: number
console.log(typeof(y)) // Output: number
```

Unlike many other programming languages, **JavaScript does not define different types of numbers, like integers, short, long, floating-point etc.** JavaScript numbers are always stored as *double precision floating point* numbers. 
→ This format stores numbers in **64 bits**, where the number (the fraction) is stored in bits 0 to 51, the exponent in bits 52 to 62, and the sign in bit 63.
### 3. Adding Numbers and Strings - `+` Operator
JavaScript uses the **`+`** operator for both addition and concatenation (such as[[#^4ca4fc| string concatenation]]). 
```js
// Number Addition
let x = 10, y = 20; 
let z = x + y; 
console.log(z); // Output: 30

// String Concatentation
let x = "10", y = "20";
let z = x + y;
console.log(z); // Output: 1020

// Adding a number and a string -> result is a string
let x = "10", y = 20;  
let z = x + y;
console.log(z); // Ouput: 1020

// Adding numbers and a string
let x = 10, y = 20, z = "30";  
let result = x + y + z; // Output: 3030
```
* If you **add a number and a string**, the result will be a string concatenation.
* If you add more than one numbers and a string, because the *JavaScript interpreter works from left to right*, the numbers are added first, then the string is concatenated. 

> **Note**: Operator `+` can also be used for numeric conversion. 
> ```js
> console.log(+true); // 1 → number
> console.log(+””); // 0 → number
> ```
### 4. Numeric Strings
JavaScript strings can have numeric content:
```js
let x = 100;         // x is a number 
let y = "100";       // y is a numeric string
```

JavaScript will try to convert strings to numbers in all numeric operations except addition: 
```js
let x = "100", y = "10";
console.log(x/y); // Output: 10
console.log(x*y); // Output: 1000
console.log(x-y); // Output: 90
console.log(x+y) // Output: 10010 - string concatenation
```
### 5. NaN - Not a Number
`NaN` is a JavaScript reserved word indicating that a number is not a legal number. `NaN` is a number: `typeof NaN` returns `number`.
* Trying to do arithmetic with a non-numeric string will result in `NaN` (Not a Number). 
* If you use `NaN` in a mathematical operation, the result will also be `NaN`, or the result will be a string concatenation if you’re adding with strings.
```js
// arithmetic operations with non-numeric string
let x = 100 / "Apple"; // Output: NaN
let x = 100 / "10"; // Output: 10 -> numeric string

// Using NaN in a mathematical operation
let a = NaN, b = 5, c = "10";  
let result = a + b; // Output: NaN
let d = a + c; // Output: NaN10
```
* You can use the global JavaScript function `isNaN()` to find out if a value is a not a number:
```js
let x = 100 / "Apple";  
isNaN(x); // Output: true
```
## 3. Data Types
> **Resources**
> - [JavaScript Data Types](https://javascript.info/types)
> - [JavaScript data types and data structures](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures)

We have been using several types until now, such as data type `number` and `string`. We will discuss all eight data types in JavaScript in better detail in this section. 
### 0. The `typeof` operator
The `typeof` operator returns the type of the operand. It’s useful when we want to process values of different types differently or just want to do a quick check. We can better see the use of `typeof` in the following sections. 
```js
typeof undefined // "undefined"

typeof 0 // "number"

typeof 10n // "bigint"

typeof true // "boolean"

typeof "foo" // "string"

typeof Symbol("id") // "symbol"

typeof Math // "object" (1)

typeof null // "object" (2)

typeof alert // "function" (3)
```
### 1. Number
* The [**number**](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Data_structures#number_type) type represents both integer and floating point numbers. 
* There are many operations for numbers, e.g. multiplication `*`, division `/`, addition `+`, subtraction `-`, and so on. 
* Besides regular numbers, there are so-called “special numeric values” which also belong to this data type: `Infinity`, `-Infinity` and `NaN`.
```js
let n = 123; 
n = 12.345; 
console.log(typeof(n)); // Output: number
```
* The [`Number()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Number/Number) function converts anything passed to it into a number if it can. Try the following: 
```js
const myString = "123";
const myNum = Number(myString);
console.log(typeof myNum); // Ouput: number
```
### 2. BigInt
In JavaScript, the “***number***” type cannot safely represent integer values larger than $(2^{53}- 1)$`(that’s 9007199254740991`), or less than $-(2^{53}- 1)$ for negatives. If they do, there may be precision error. → We can use type `BigInt` to help store these large values, though they are rarely needed. 
* We can declare a BigInt by appending `n` to the end of an integer.
```js 
const bigInt = 1234567890123456789012345678901234567890n;
console.log(typeof(bigInt)); // Output: bigint
```
### 3.Strings
> [!resources]
> [Handling text - strings in JavaScript](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/First_steps/Strings)

> <u>**Note**</u>: There are not character `char` type in JavaScript. 

 1. A **string** is a **piece of text** and and is declared with surrounding *quotes*. There are three types of quotes we can use to surround a string in JavaScript: 
* Double quote: `"Hello"`
* Single quote: `'Hello'`
* Backticks: ``Hello` `

***Double and single quotes*** are “simple” quotes. There’s practically *no difference* between them in JavaScript. 
```js
let userName = "My Name"; 
console.log(typeof(userName)); // Output: string
```

2. **String Literals:** we use ***backticks*** and **`${...}`** to embed variables and expressions into a string. 
* The expression inside `${…}` is evaluated and the result becomes a part of the string. We can put anything in there: a variable like `name` or an arithmetical expression like `1 + 2` or something more complex.
```js
let userName = "My Name";
console.log(`Hello, my name is: ${userName}!`)
// Output: Hello,  my name is My Name!
```
* Using template literals, we can include expressions in strings: 
```js
const song = "Hello World";
const score = 9;
const highestScore = 10;
const output = `I like the song ${song}. I gave it a score of ${
  (score / highestScore) * 100
}%.`;
console.log(output); // Output: "I like the song Hello World. I gave it a score of 90%."
```

3. JavaScript strings are ***immutable***. This means that once a string is created, it is not possible to modify it. 
```js
let myString = "Hello!"
myString[0] = "Y"; // We're trying to turn this string into "Yello"; 
// but this will cause an error
```

4. **String Concatenation**:
We can concatenate normal strings using the **`+`** operator:  ^4ca4fc
```js
const greeting = "Hello";
const name = "User1";
console.log(greeting + ", " + name); // "Hello, User1"
```
→ However, template literals usually give you more *readable* code.
### 4. Boolean 
The **boolean** type has only two values: `true` and `false`. This type is commonly used to store yes/no values: `true` means “yes, correct”, and `false` means “no, incorrect”.
```js
let greaterThanOne = true; 
let greaterThanTen = false; 
console.log(typeof(greaterThanOne)) // Output: 
```

Boolean values also come as a **result of comparisons:**
```js
let isGreater = 4 > 1; 
console.log(isGreater); // Output: true;
```
### 5. “null” Value
The special **`null`** value does not belong to any of the types described above. It forms a separate type of its own which contains only the `null` value. It’s just a special value which represents *“nothing”, “empty” or “value unknown”.*
```js
let age = null; // age is unknown
console.log(typeof(age)); // Output: object - because null is an object in JavaScript
```
### 6. “undefined” Value
The special value **`undefined`** also stands apart. It makes a type of its own, just like `null`. The meaning of `undefined` is “value is not assigned”.
* If a variable is declared, but not assigned, then its value is `undefined`. 
```js
let x; 
console.log(typeof(x)); // Output: undefined
```
### 7. Symbols
A [`symbol`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol) is a **unique** and **immutable** primitive value and may be used as the key of an Object property.
### 8. Objects
The **`object`** type is special. All other types are called “***primitive***” because their values can contain only a *single thing* (be it a string or a number or whatever). In contrast, objects are used to store **collections of data** and more **complex entities.** We will discuss objects in further details later. 
```js
let user = { // an object called user
	name: "John", // the key "name" store value "John"
	age: 30 // the key "age" store value 30
};

console.log(typeof (user)) // Output: object
```
## 4. Strings Methods
> **Resources**
> - [JavaScript String Methods](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_string_methods.asp)
> - [JavaScript String Reference](https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_string.asp)
> - [String](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String)

Javascript strings are **primitive and immutable**: All **string methods produces a new string** without altering the original string.
### 1. `String()` function
The [`String()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/String/String) function convert its argument to a string.
```js
const myNum2 = 123;
const myString2 = String(myNum2);
console.log(typeof myString2); // Ouput: string
```
### 2.  String Length Method
The `length` property returns the length of a string:
```js
let text = "Hello";  
let length = text.length; 
console.log(length); // Output: 5
```
### 3. Methods for Extracting String Character
There 4 methods for extracting string characters: 
- The `charAt(_position_)` Method
- The `charCodeAt(_position_)` Method
- The `at(_position_)` Method
- Using property access `[]` like in arrays. 

1. `charAt()`: the method returns the character at a specified index (position) in a string.
```js
let text = "HELLO WORLD";  
let char = text.charAt(0);
console.log(char); // Output: "H"
```
2. `charCodeAt()`: the method returns the code of the character at a specified index in a string. The method returns a UTF-16 code (an integer between 0 and 65535).
```js
let text = "HELLO WORLD";  
let char = text.charCodeAt(0); // Output: 72
```
3. `at()`: the method returns the character at a specified index (position) in a string. 
* The `at()` method is a new addition to JavaScript. It allows the use of **negative indexes** while `charAt()` do not.
```js
const name = "University";  
let letter = name.at(2); // Output: i

// negative index
let char = name.at(-1); // Output: y 
```
4. **Property Access `[]`**
- If no character is found, `[]` returns undefined, while `charAt()` returns an empty string.
- It is read only. `str[0] = "A"` gives no error (but does not work!)
```js
let text = "HELLO WORLD";  
let char = text[0]; // Output: H
console.log(text[-1]); // Output: undefined

text[0] = "A";    // Gives no error, but does not work, because JS is immutable
```
### 4. Methods for Extracting String Parts
There are 3 methods for extracting a part of a string:
- `slice(_start_, _end_)`
- `substring(_start_, _end_)`
- `substr(_start_, _length_)`

1. `slice()`: extracts a part of a string and **returns the extracted part in a new string**. 
* The method can take 2 parameters: start position, and end position (**end not included**).
* The method can take only 1 parameter, which is the start position, the method will slice the rest of the string starting from this starting position. 
* If the parameter value is negative, the position is counted from the end of the string.
```js
let text = "Apple, Banana, Kiwi";  

// two parameters
let part1 = text.slice(7, 13);
console.log(part1); // Output: Banana (the character at index 13 is not included)

// one parameter
let part2 = text.slice(7); 
console.log(part2);

// negative parameter
let part3 = text.slice(-12, -6)
console.log(part3); // Output: Banana
```

2. `substring()`: `substring()` is similar to `slice()`. 
* The difference is that start and end values less than 0 (negative) are treated as 0 in `substring()`. 
* If you omit the second parameter, `substring()` will slice out the rest of the string.
```js
let str = "Apple, Banana, Kiwi";  
let part = str.substring(7, 13); // Output: Banana

// negative parameter
console.log(str.substring(-10, 13)) // Apple, Banana

// one parameter
console.log(str.substring(7)) // Output: Banana, Kiwi
```
3. `substr()`: `substr()` is similar to `slice()`.
* The difference is that the second parameter specifies the **length** of the extracted part in the second argument of the parameter.
* If you omit the second parameter, `substr()` will slice out the rest of the string.
* If the first parameter is negative, the position counts from the end of the string.
```js
let str = "Apple, Banana, Kiwi";  
let part = str.substr(7, 6); 

// one parameter
console.log(str.substr(7)); // Output: Banana, Kiwi

// negative parameter
console.log(str.substr(-4)); // Output: Kiwi
```
### 5. Converting to Upper and Lower Case
* A string is converted to **upper** **case** with `toUpperCase()`.
* A string is converted to **lower** **case** with `toLowerCase()`.
```js
let text = "Hello World!";  
let upper = text.toUpperCase(); // Output: HELLO WORLD!
let lower = text.toLowerCase(); // Ouput: hello world!
```

### 6. `concat()`method
The `concat()` method **joins two or more strings.** 
* The `concat()` method can be used instead of the `+` operator to concatenate string. 
```js
// these two lines do the same thing. // Output: Hello World!
text = "Hello" + " " + "World!";  
text = "Hello".concat(" ", "World!");
```
### 7. `trim` method
The `trim()` method **removes whitespace** from both sides of a string:
```js
let text1 = "      Hello World!      ";  
let text2 = text1.trim(); // Output: "Hello World"
```
* The `trimStart()` method works like `trim()`, but removes whitespace only from the start of a string.
* The `trimEnd()` method works like `trim()`, but removes whitespace only from the end of a string.
```js
let text1 = "      Hello World!      ";  
let text2 = text1.trimStart(); // Output: "Hello World!      "
let text3 = text1.trimEnd(); // Output: "     Hello World!"
```
### 8. `repeat()` method
The `repeat()` method returns a string with a number of copies of a string. The method returns a new string and does not change the original string. The syntax is: `string_.repeat(_count_)`
```js
let text = "Hello world!";  
let result = text.repeat(2); // Output: Hello world!Hello world!
```
### 9. `replace()` method
The `replace()` method **replaces a specified value** with another value in a string. The method does not change the string it is called on, it returns a new string. 
* By default, `replace()` method replaces only the **first match.** 
* By default, `replace()` method is **case sensitive**. 
```js
let oldText = "Please visit Microsoft and Microsoft!";  
let newText = oldText.replace("Microsoft", "W3Schools");
// Output: Please visit W3Schools and Microsoft!
```
### 10. `split()` method
A string can be **converted to an array** with the `split()` method. The method takes in an argument that is the separator: 
```js
text.split(",")    // Split on commas  
text.split(" ")    // Split on spaces  
text.split("|")    // Split on pipe
text.split("")     // Split on each character
```

```js
let myString = "Hello!"; 
let myArray = myString.split(""); 
```
## 5. Conditionals
> **Resources**
> - [Comparisons](https://javascript.info/comparison)
> - [JavaScript if, else, and else if](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_if_else.asp)
### 1. Comparison
All comparison operators return a boolean value, `true` or `1`, `false`, or `0`. We often use comparison to compare numbers, but are a few special comparison that we can perform: 
1. <u>**String Comparison**</u>: To see whether a string is greater than another, JavaScript uses the so-called **“dictionary” or “lexicographical”** order.
```js
console.log('Z' > 'A'); // true

console.log('B' > 'AC'); // true, because 'B' > 'A' -> stopped checking and return true without checking 'C'
  
console.log('Hello!' > 'Hello!!!'); // if the prior characters are the same, the longer string is greater
```

The **algorithm to compare two strings** is:
1. Compare the first character of both strings.
2. If the first character from the first string is greater (or less) than the other string’s, then the first string is greater (or less) than the second. We’re done.
3. Otherwise, if both strings’ first characters are the same, compare the second characters the same way.
4. Repeat until the end of either string.
5. If both strings end at the same length, then they are equal. Otherwise, the longer string is greater.

2. <u>**Comparison of Different Types**</u>: 
When comparing values of different types, JavaScript converts the values to numbers.
```js
console.log('2' > 1); // true, because string '2' is converted to number 2
console.log('01' == 1); // true, because string '01' is converted to number 1

console.log(true == 1); // true
console.log(false == 0); // true

console.log('' == 0); // true -> empty string equals 0
console.log('' == false); // true -> empty string equals false

console.log('' != 1); // true
```
* Strict equality `===`, introduced in[[#^8c5dbb | comparison operators]], checks for equality in value and in data type. 
```js
console.log(true === 1); // false, because they're different type
console.log('' === 0); // false
console.log('' === false); // false

// this also applies to strict non-equality
console.log('' !== true); // true
```
3. <u>**Comparing `null` and `undefined`**</u>
* Strict equality check: 
```js
console.log(null === undefined); // false
```
* Non-strict equality check:
```js
console.log(null == undefined); // true

console.log(null == 0); // true, null gets converted to 0
console.log(undefined == NaN); // true, undefined gets converted to NaN
```