> [Computer Architecture](https://neetcode.io/courses/system-design-for-beginners/0)
## 1. Components
### 1. Disk
* A disk is the primary **storage device** for data in a computer. It is **persistent**, meaning the data will be persisted even when the computer crashes or is turned off.
* How much information the disk can store is usually measured in **TBs** (terabytes). (10^12 bytes)
#### 1. HDD - Hard Disk Drives
* Mechanical, and have a head/write head. 
* The older they get, the more wear and tear they collect which slows them down overtime. 
#### 2. SDD - Solid-state Drive
* Significantly faster and more popular. 
* They do not have moving parts, and rely on reading and writing data electronically (similar to RAM). 
### 2. RAM - Random Access Memory
* Used for storing information but is typically a lot **smaller in size** compared to disk drives. 
* RAM generally varies from 1GB - 128GB because RAM is much **more expensive** than disk space. 
* Reading and writing to RAM is **significantly faster** than disk (at least 10-100 times faster.)
* It is often described as **volatile memory**, → the data gets erased once the computer is shut down. This is why it is important to save your work to disk before shutting down your computer.
> The RAM and disk do not directly communicate with each other. They rely on the **CPU** to facilitate data transfer between them.
### 3. CPU - Central Processing Unit 
* The brain of the computer, it **reads/writes from the RAM and disks**, it’s the intermediary between the RAM and disk.
* All **computations** are done within the CPU, such as addition/subtraction/multiplication etc. This occurs in a matter of milliseconds.
	* It **fetches instructions from the RAM**, **decodes** those instructions and **executes** the decoded instructions.
	* On the lowest level, all these instructions are represented as bytes.
* The CPU also consists of a **cache**. A cache is extremely fast memory that lies on the same die as the CPU.