## 1. Thinking in System Design
In system design interviews, you aren't expected to know the nitty-gritty details of every single component - it is more about the **thought process and analysis** that goes behind creating an effective distributed system.
 
Whenever you're faced with designing a big enterprise system, it can be boiled down to three points: **moving data, storing data, transforming data.**
### 1. Moving Data
When designing large systems, our focus shifts to **moving data between different clients, across a network of servers,** which may be geographically dispersed across the world. This is significantly more challenging compared to local data movement.
### 2. Storing Data
Choosing the right data storage solution depends on the specific needs of your system, similar to selecting data structures for algorithms. Distributed systems often deal with **massive amounts of data** that wouldn't fit on a single server's disk. The chosen storage solution should be efficient in terms of data access, retrieval, and modification.
###  3. Transforming Data
<u>**Example 1:**</u> If we were given a bunch of server logs, we output the percentage of successful requests vs. the percentage of failed requests. → sometimes this is handled by a monitoring service.
<u>**Example 2:**</u> Given some medical records, we want to filter the patients by age.

Just like with data storage, choosing the best data transformation approach depends on the specific needs of your system. You want to achieve the desired outcome while optimizing for efficiency.


