---
tags:
  - Reading
---

## Summary
### Kafka Tamura
Kafka Tamura ran away from home on his 15th birthday. With everything he needs in his backpack, he travelled far away from home on a cheap bus ride to Takamatsu, settled in a room in a business hotel. He saw Komura library on the newspaper once and decided to pay the library a visit. He loved the place immediately, so he stops by every day. The librarian, Oshima, grew fond of him. Every day after he ran away, he would visit the library and read books all day, go to the public gym to stay in shape, and then come back to the business hotel. One day, he found himself knocked out on the side of the road, far from where he last remembered he was. He saw blood on his shirt and grew scared, so he decided to ditch the hotel, called Sakura, a girl he met on the bus on his way here, and asked for her help. Sakura let him stay at her place for one night, she comforted him. Kafka tells her about his situation, how his mother took his adopted sister and ran away. He didn’t tell her about his friend, Crow, or the omen living inside him though.

The next morning, he went straight to Komura library again, when he met Oshima - the librarian and he told Oshima everything. Oshima decided to let him become his assistant, so he can live at the library. But before Oshima works everything out, he drives Kafka to a secluded, distant cabin far in the mountains, which he owns, so Kafka can stay there before he can start living at the Komura library. Kafka stayed at the cabin, and overwhelmed him was silence, and also tranquility. He spent his time here reading, exploring the area, getting used to the silence. On the morning of the 4th day, Oshima came back to bring Kafka to the city.

As they drive back to the city, Oshima told Kafka of the story of Miss Saeki, the person in charge of the Komura library. Miss Saeki at the age of nineteen wrote a beautiful song to her lover, the name of that song was ‘Kafka on the Shore’. When miss Saeki lost her soulmate 20 years ago, out of grief she disappeared, no one knew where she went, what happened, all they know is that she only came back to take over the library after her mother passed away. The library was important to her because her soulmate once lived there, and now Kafka will be staying in the same room he’d once stayed in.

Chapter 19 is interesting, Kafka has settled in the library. His first day working, he met two women who are… extreme feminists. The chapter discusses “woke culture” almost. Overall, we’ve learned that Oshima is a biological female, but his mind is a male, he’s interested in men but thinks of himself as gay. He talks about the pain of discrimination, and how it is the people who are narrow minded with no imagination who forces empty words on you, making you do things you don’t want, just like those extreme feminists, and those who killed Miss Saeki’s lover, are the real monsters.

Koichi Tamura - who presumably was killed by Nakata - appears to be Kafka’s father. The night his father died was the night he was unconscious and had blood all over him. He told Oshima about the terrible curse/prophecy his father placed upon him, that he’d kill his father and be with his mother. This omen is why Kafka ran away from home, trying to escape the terrible curse. Kafka felt, that somehow through his unconscious dream, he had come home and killed his father. It seems like despite having run away, the curse seems to follow Kafka, and he cannot escape/do otherwise than what fate destined him to be. That night when Kafka found out his father was murdered, he saw a ghost. The ghost is a silhouette of beautiful young girl around Kafka’s age, she sits on the chair looking at the painting, the Kafka on the Shore painting of Miss Saeki’s boyfriend when he was younger. Eventually, she walks through the door soundlessly and disappears. Kafka soon realizes that the ghost is Miss Saeki, a version of her at age 15, and Kafka feels himself drawn to the ghost, not the real miss Saeki but the ghost. When Kafka listens to the song and studies the lyrics, he felt the song speaking to his curse, there seems to be a correlation.

Kafka sees the ghost of Miss Saeki again, another night. He knows she doesn’t belong in this world, even when he sees her in his room, he knows she is from a different world, separated with his by an invisible line. As he thinks about the boy in the painting, he felt jealous of him, and he realizes that the ghost of Miss Saeki and him had one thing in common, they were in love with people who no longer exists. Kafka - in love with the ghost of a young Miss Saeki, and the ghost - in love with her boyfriend who died. Kafka asked Oshima for a music sheet of Kafka on the Shore, then told Oshima how he thinks Miss Saeki can be his mother. That afternoon, Kafka sat down and talk to Miss Saeki, it rained outside and she told him about a book she wrote about lightning, where she went all over Japan interviewing people who got hit by lightning. That evening, Kafka plays the music piece on the piano, trying to get it right. Then suddenly he remembers, how his father was also hit by lightning when he was younger. He contemplates the coincidences, and wondered if his father and Miss Saeki really met, and if she could be his mother.

The next night, Kafka meets the ghost again, and he calls out “Miss Saeki.” The ghost turns to him, and in a moment when he closes his eyes, she vanishes again. That following day, a detective came looking for Kafka, the police have tracked Kafka’s phone being used, and are searching for him in Takamatsu. Oshima lied and drove the detective away from the library. Later that day, Kafka have a conversation with Miss Saeki, where he asks her if she has a child, but she didn’t give him an answer. Slowly, Kafka felt confused, as he doesn’t know if he’s in love with 15-year-old version of Miss Saeki or the fifty-something year old version of her right now.

Kafka calls Sakura that evening to thank her for everything, and inform her how the cops are looking for him and he hopes this won’t affect her. He tells her that he’s in love, with someone unreal, far from reality. Sakura told him to be careful, that he’s like a brother to her. That night Kafka listens to Kafka on the Shore, drifting to sleep. He wakes up to the girl silhouette again, sitting in that chair, looking at the painting. But this time something is different, like the axis of time has changed, or he’s fell into a time warp, but dream and reality bleed into one, the girl is Miss Saeki in the present, and this is her dream collapsing onto his. It was unsure if she was real or not, Miss Saeki was asleep but had her eyes wide opened. She took off her clothes and crawled into bed with Kafka, and they made love. Then she got up, slipped through the cracks of the door, and was gone again.

### Nakata
During the World War, young Nakata was sent from Tokyo to a countryside region. Here he ran into an accident during a class field trip, where him and his classmates all grew unconscious. While the other kids all woke up after a while and were all fine, Nakata didn’t. And when he did wake up, he had lost his entire memory - his mind became completely blank. After that, from a intelligent kid, he turned into a fool, but gained the ability to talk to cats.

According to his teacher, who took all the kids to the hill on the field trip, that day, everyone saw something that resembled a silver war plane on the sky. The teacher, in a letter to a professor who helped treat unconscious Nakata, recalled the story of that incident. The previous night to the incident, she had had an erotic dream about her husband, and the following day, she suddenly had her period early, while leading the children up the hill. She was desperately trying to clean up her period blood, but Nakata discovered the bloody cloth. The teacher uncontrollably and violently beat Nakata, in front of all the other students, to her absolute regret. It was then that all the children, including Nakata, collapsed and went unconscious.

In present time, Nakata is a dumb old man living off of the government’s support money. He is trying to look for a cat named Goma, trying get information by talking to other cats. Eventually, he was told that there was a tall man with a strange hat tricking dumb kittens into a bag, kidnapping them from an abandoned construction site. And so Nakata waited every day for that man at the construction site. After a week, a big, vicious looking dog - that can talk - came to the empty lot and told Nakata to follow it, leading the old man to meet Johnnie Walker, the man with the strange hat who took his identity from the man on the whiskey brand. Johnnie Walker was the one who caught all the cats, severed their heads and killed them, storing the severed heads in the refrigerator. He’s doing this to collect the cats’ souls and use the souls to make a special flute. This flute will allow him to gather even more souls - bigger souls, then make a bigger flute, eventually he can make a flute so big it can rival the universe.

Johnnie Walker has Goma and is willing to let Nakata take Goma back if Nakata helps him. What Johnnie Walker wants Nakata to do for him, is to kill him. He told Nakata that Nakata needs to make a choice, even if it’s a risky choice and it isn’t something he enjoys doing. Nakata must kill Johnnie Walker, or Johnnie Walker will kill the cats, it’s just the rules. Johnnie Walker then pulls out a case, within them are 5 cats including Goma. He’s going to kill them one by one right in front of Nakata’s eyes and Nakata has to decide whether he can kill Johnnie Walker or not. When Johnnie Walker reached the last two cats, Nakata felt like he was losing himself, so he stood up and without hesitation, killed Johnnie Walker. After he killed Johnnie Walker, he passed out, and when he woke up, Nakata found himself lying in the empty lot again along with Mimi and Goma. It seems that Nakata can no longer speak to cats after this. Immediately after, Nakata reported the murder to the police but the police didn’t seem to believe him. When the police came to find what Nakata’d reported was true, (sculptor Koichi Tamura - Johnnie Walker? stabbed to death at home), Nakata had already disappeared from town.

For some reason, Nakata needs to travel west of the Tomei Highway, and so through rough effort he managed to find hitch-hikers who were willing to drive him there. On his way, him and the drivers talked about their perspective of the world. Something bazaar happened at one of the stops, when Nakata saw a biker gang beating up a person, to near death. As if he knew it, Nakata opened his umbrella, and leeches rained from the sky, chasing away the biker gang members. Nakata met another driver and continued his trip west of the highway, this time it’s revealed that he’s wants to cross the bridge and get to Shikoku, which is where Kafka is currently at. Nakata doesn’t know why he’s drawn to Shikoku or what he’d do once he crosses the bridge, but he just knows he that he must. His driver, Hoshino, decided to venture with him to Shikoku.

While alone, for a moment, Nakata thought about his past, the blurry memories before the accident where he used to be a smart kid, and how after the accident, growing up he was bullied and ignored for being dumb. Nakata reflected on his life, how he was always different from everyone else, and the only ones that truly understood him were the cats he talked to. Nakata did have a job, working at a woodworking job for 37 years and he did save a good amount of money. Unfortunately, Nakata’s cousin stole all his hard-earned money and ran away, he was left penniless. Eventually, one of his brothers helped him out, giving him an apartment to stay in, took “care” of him to an extent, but the family relationship was cold.

Nakata and Hoshino arrived in Shikoku, and Nakata fell asleep for 34 hours straight. When he woke up, Nakata and Hoshino get on an express train and get to Takamatsu, where Kafka and the library is. Nakata is in search of an entrance stone and he needs to move that stone. Hoshino and Nakata searched for the books everywhere, asked around, looked it up in the library, but nothing. One night, Hoshino couldn't sleep and went out to explore the places around, he met Colonel Sanders, who appears to be some sort of pimp. He claims to know where the entrance stone is and will tell Hoshino after he gets him a girl. Colonel Sanders led Hoshino to a shrine, where he called up a girl he referred to as the the sex machine. The girl eventually arrived and took Hoshino to a love hotel nearby. After the sex, Hoshino went back to the shrine, where Colonel Sanders told him that the entrance stone is right within the shrine.

Colonel Sanders led Hoshino into the woods heading to the old shrine. Here, Colonel Sanders explained that he is not actually Colonel Sander, he is something not human, not God or Buddha, he is something insensate that takes just happens to take the shape of an influential human. Eventually, Colonel Sander and Hoshino reaches the shrine, he told Hoshino to take out the entrance stone and bring it home. That night, Hoshino take the heavy entrance stone back to the hotel, put it next to Nakata’s pillow while Nakata’s sound asleep. Nakata wakes up to find the entrance stone next to him.